# Welcome

Welcome to my personal development handbook. The primary purpose of this
handbook is to serve as a living guide for best practices that I have picked up
over the years I've been working on open-source projects. The secondary purpose
is that it might serve the public community as source material for the various
topics covered. By no means are these intended to be universal best practices,
and many of them are very opionated, however hopefully they still serve as a
potential source of insight for others.

## Organization

This is a living document which means it is subject to rapid changes. That being
said, guides and material are loosely categorized based on the technology being
discussed. For example, specific practices for programming langauges are
categorized by language and most version control reference material is
categorized under Git.

Some categories are too abstract to be contained by a single technology category
and these are categorized more broadly (i.e. general, deployment).

## Focus

It's helpful to understand the driving focus behind this handbook. My interests
are mainly aligned with automation, specifically methodologies that fall under
the (overly broad) DevOps category. While I have been programming since I was a
kid, I've always enjoyed the process of optimizing development and deployment,
employing best practices for increasing productivity, quality, and security.
Thus, much of the material contained in this handbook will fall within these
topics.

In addition to the above, I'm an avid homelabber and consumer of self-hosted
software solutions. Some best practices for these hobbies are also provided
here.

## Feedback

If you happen to be perusing this handbook and are willing to provide feedback
on anything you come across, please open an issue on Github. Almost everything
I've learned has come from applying what others have taught me and I place a
high value on feedback from the community.
